After two decades in space, NASA's Cassini spacecraft is nearing the end of its remarkable journey of exploration. Having expended almost every bit of the rocket propellant it carried to Saturn, operators are deliberately plunging Cassini into the planet to ensure Saturn's moons will remain pristine for future exploration - in particular, the ice-covered, ocean-bearing moon Enceladus, but also Titan, with its intriguing pre-biotic
chemistry.  Beginning in 2010, Cassini began a seven-year mission extension in which it completed many moon flybys
while observing seasonal changes on Saturn and Titan. The plan for this phase of the mission was to expend
all of the spacecraft's propellant while exploring Saturn, ending with a plunge into the planet's atmosphere. In
April 2017, Cassini was placed on an impact course that unfolded over five months of daring dives - a series
of 22 orbits that each pass between the planet and its rings. Called the Grand Finale, this final phase of the
mission has brought unparalleled observations of the planet and its rings from closer than ever before.
On Sept. 15, 2017, the spacecraft will make its final approach to the giant planet Saturn. But this encounter
will be like no other. This time, Cassini will dive into the planet's atmosphere, sending science data for as long
as its small thrusters can keep the spacecraft's antenna pointed at Earth. Soon after, Cassini will burn up and
disintegrate like a meteor.
To its very end, Cassini is a mission of thrilling exploration. Launched on Oct. 15, 1997, the mission entered
orbit around Saturn on June 30, 2004 (PDT), carrying the European Huygens probe. After its four-year prime
mission, Cassini's tour was extended twice. Its key discoveries have included the global ocean with indications
of hydrothermal activity within Enceladus, and liquid methane seas on Titan.
And although the spacecraft may be gone after the finale, its enormous collection of data about Saturn - the
giant planet itself, its magnetosphere, rings and moons - will continue to yield new discoveries for decades.

The Cassini-Huygens mission - a joint endeavor of
NASA, ESA (the European Space Agency), and the
Italian Space Agency - is the first mission to orbit
Saturn and explore its environs in detail. The mission
was conceived from the beginning as an international
endeavor, in 1982, just after the two NASA Voyager
spacecraft flew past Saturn. The Voyager flybys whetted
the appetites of planetary scientists for more in-depth
exploration, particularly with regard to the mysterious moon Titan. Launched in 1997, Cassini has been
touring the Saturn system since arriving there in 2004,
performing a detailed, up-close study of the planet, its
rings and moons.

The mission delivered ESA's Huygens probe to Titan in
2005, where it performed the first descent and landing
on a world in the outer solar system. In complement to
Huygens' dazzling revelations about Titan, the Cassini
orbiter performed 127 of its own close flybys of Titan
(with many more distant encounters).

This graphic summarizes Cassini's 13 years orbiting Saturn, with
moon flybys grouped into columns for each phase of the mission. The Grand Finale orbits appear as Saturn flybys in 2017.
This list of icy satellite flybys includes three additional close encounters (Phoebe, Helene and Epimetheus) not included in the
official tally of 12 "targeted" flybys. At bottom, Saturn's northern
hemisphere seasons are indicated from 2004 to 2017. Credit:
NASA/JPL-Caltech. Click to view this image online.


By the end of its mission, the Cassini spacecraft will
have observed almost half of a Saturn year, which is 29
Earth years long. The four seasons of Saturn's year last
about seven Earth years apiece, and upon Cassini's
arrival at Saturn, the planet's northern hemisphere was
just beginning to emerge from winter. Following its initial, four-year tour, Cassini's mission was extended two more
years, to enable the spacecraft to observe changes -
particularly in the rings - as Saturn reached equinox
and the Sun shone edge-on to the rings. After equinox,
Cassini was granted an additional seven-year extension.
This enabled scientists to follow up on their earlier discoveries at Enceladus and Titan, and watch as summer
sunlight came to the northern hemisphere of Saturn and
its moons, while winter darkness embraced the south.

shown that Europa isn't an oddball: Potentially habitable
ocean worlds exist even in the Saturn system -
10 times farther from the Sun than where Earth sits.
When the Cassini mission started, scientists presumed
Enceladus was too small to generate and hold onto
the heat required to maintain subsurface reservoirs of
liquid water. Cassini's discovery of intense geologic
activity near the moon's unexpectedly warm south
pole - complete with towering jets of icy spray - sent
shockwaves through the space science community.
After more than a decade of investigation, the mission eventually determined that Enceladus hosts a
global liquid water ocean, with salts and simple organic
molecules, and likely even hydrothermal vents on its
seafloor. Thanks to Cassini, Enceladus is now one of the
most promising places in our solar system to search for
present-day life beyond Earth.

The findings of the Cassini mission have revolutionized
our understanding of Saturn, its complex rings, the
amazing assortment of moons and the planet's dynamic
magnetic environment. The most distant planetary orbiter ever launched, Cassini started making astonishing
discoveries immediately upon arrival and continues today. Icy jets shoot from the tiny moon Enceladus. Titan's
hydrocarbon lakes and seas are dominated by liquid
ethane and methane, and complex pre-biotic chemicals
form in the atmosphere and rain to the surface. Threedimensional structures tower above Saturn's rings, and
a giant Saturn storm circled the entire planet for most of
a year. Cassini's findings at Saturn have also fundamentally altered many of our concepts of how planets form
around stars.

Saturn's largest moon, Titan, offered tantalizing hints
that it, too, could help us understand whether life could
have evolved elsewhere. Cassini and ESA's Huygens
probe (which landed on Titan's surface) found clear evidence for a global ocean of water beneath Titan's thick,
icy crust and an atmosphere teeming with prebiotic
chemicals. Based on modeling studies, some researchers think Titan, too, may have hydrothermal chemistry in
its ocean that could provide energy for life. On its frigid
surface, which hosts vast seas of liquid hydrocarbons,
scientists wonder, could Titan be home to exotic forms
of life "as we don't know it"?

When Cassini ends, it will leave a rich scientific and
engineering legacy.
Mission Achievements
- NASA's Cassini spacecraft and ESA's Huygens
probe expanded our understanding of the kinds of
worlds where life might exist.

- At Saturn's largest moon, Titan, Cassini and
Huygens showed us one of the most Earth-like
worlds we've ever encountered, with weather, climate
and geology that provide new ways to understand our
home planet.

With discoveries at Saturn's moons Enceladus and
Titan, Cassini and Huygens made exploring "ocean
worlds" a major focus of planetary science. Insights from
the mission also help us look for potentially habitable
planets - and moons - beyond our solar system.

Titan is 10 times farther from the Sun than Earth's orbit,
and much colder, but Cassini showed it to be the only
other place in our solar system with stable liquid on
its surface and a kind of "hydrological" cycle involving
methane rather than water.

Life as we know it is thought to be possible in stable environments that offer liquid water, essential chemical elements, and a source of energy (from sunlight or chemical reactions). Before Cassini launched in 1997, it wasn't
clear that any place in the icy outer solar system (that is,
beyond Mars) might have this mix of ingredients. By the
next year, NASA's Galileo mission revealed that Jupiter's
moon Europa likely has a global ocean that could be
habitable. Since its 2004 arrival at Saturn, Cassini has flowing liquid hydrocarbons at Titan make for eerily
Earthlike landscapes -- they carve branching channels
and steep canyons into rock-hard ice; they settle into
lakes and seas with gently sloping shorelines and sheltered bays; they tumble water-ice "rocks" into rounded
pebble shapes like those in earthly rivers.

Titan's landscape also shares other similarities with
Earth. Large, arid swaths of dunes gird the moon's
equatorial regions. Composed of organic materials that
settle out of Titan's thick, hazy atmosphere, these dunelands are sculpted by winds in ways similar to dunes in
places like Namibia and the Sahara. Scientists have also
spotted volcano-like mounds that, if indeed volcanic in
nature, would erupt slushy lavas made of water rather
than molten rock.

Cassini has provided a brief glimpse into deep time in
the Saturn system. The rings, for example, are a natural
laboratory for processes that form planets - a mini solar system, if you will. They show us how objects clump
together and break apart. And in the ripples we can read
the history of impacts into the rings. We also see "propeller" features that obey the same physical processes
that form planets.
Moons in the Saturn system are also time capsules
preserving histories of bombardment and other forces at
play over time. At Titan, in particular, we have access to
the kinds of complex carbon chemistry that might have
taken place on Earth in its "prebiotic" days. During the
Cassini mission's finale, data about the planet's interior
and the mass of the rings will provide powerful insights
about their formation and evolution.

From its perch in space, Cassini has been watching Titan's climate cycle play out over the years, with
seasonal changes bringing bright, feathery methane
rain clouds that dump precipitation on the landscape.
Huygens saw clear evidence of a landscape that experiences intermittent but heavy floods, not unlike places in
the American desert Southwest.
Titan's smoggy atmosphere resembles an extreme
version of the skies above Los Angeles or other major
cities on a day with poor air quality. And, more importantly, Titan's atmosphere is thought to be similar to
early Earth's before life developed here. Titan provides
perhaps the best stage in the solar system to watch the
organic chemistry that led to the origin of life on Earth
billions of years ago. Titan can also be considered a
possible analog for the future Earth. Its methane cycle
hints at what Earth's water cycle might look like in the far
future as the increasingly brighter-burning Sun changes
the stability of water in our oceans and atmosphere. The
seas at Titan's poles might be remnants of larger bodies
of liquid that once covered much more of the moon's
surface.

- The longevity of the Cassini mission has enabled
us to observe weather and seasonal changes, improving our understanding of similar processes at
Earth, and potentially those at planets around other
stars.
While other missions flew past Saturn or trained telescopes periodically from afar, Cassini has had a frontrow seat for approximately 13 years -- nearly half a
Saturn year (northern winter to the start of northern
summer) - to epic changes unfolding before its very
eyes.
This long-lived robotic observing platform, bristling with
science instruments, provided an unparalleled glimpse
into what happens as weather and climate conditions
on the planet and Titan respond to the seasons -
sometimes rather abruptly. Among the most amazing
changes Cassini has captured: the eruption of a onceevery-30-years storm (one of the most powerful ever
seen in the solar system), methane rainstorms at Titan
and the appearance and disappearance of features
called "magic islands" in Titan's seas, whose nature
scientists are still working to understand.
Over a longer span of years, the color of Saturn's northern hemisphere shifted as the ring shadows retreated
southward - changing from the surprisingly bluish
tones seen upon arrival to the hazy, golden hues most
observers are familiar with. On Titan, Cassini witnessed

- Cassini is, in a sense, a time machine. It has given
us a portal to see the physical processes that likely
shaped the development of our solar system, as well
as planetary systems around other stars.

The spacecraft's patient eyes also were rewarded with
new views of Saturn's north pole as winter ended there
and the Sun rose once more. Cassini's infrared sensors
measured temperatures across the rings as the Sun set
on one side and rose on the other, revealing new details
about the structure of ring particles. It used the onset of
wintry darkness at the south pole of Enceladus to obtain
an unambiguous reading of the amount of heat coming
out of the moon's interior. And it saw the mysterious ring
features called spokes (wedge-shaped features in the
rings that rotate along with the rings like the spokes in a
wheel) appear and disappear - apparently a seasonal
phenomenon.

Cassini found that Enceladus is not only active, but its
geologic activity is creating Saturn's E ring and spraypainting the surfaces of several of the other moons with
its highly reflective ice particles.
The mission also followed up on a mystery from the
early 1980s when NASA's Voyager spacecraft flew by
the Saturn system and saw bright wispy terrains on
Dione. Cassini found that the features were in fact a vast
network of canyons. Cassini also detected hints of a
faint atmosphere that might have been outgassed from
the moon's interior.
And Cassini watched closely over many years how
Prometheus interacts with Saturn's F ring to create features like "streamers," "plumes" and "drapes."
- Cassini showed us the complexity of Saturn's rings
and the dramatic processes operating within them.
Although Cassini scientists are still working on determining the exact origin of Saturn's main system of rings -
and hope to collect data that will answer this question
as its mission draws to a close - they have learned
along the way that there are in fact, many ways to form
rings around a planet.

- Cassini revealed Saturn's moons to be unique
worlds with their own stories to tell.
Planet-size Titan and diminutive Enceladus stood out
in Cassini's in-depth survey of Saturn's moons. But the
mission showed that every moon in the Saturn system is
a unique character with its own mysteries, and many of
Saturn's satellites are related in surprising ways.

A diffuse ring is created out of the bits of water ice jetted
out by the moon Enceladus (the E ring). Other rings
were created because of the material thrown off when
meteorites hit moons (such as the G ring and the two
rings discovered by Cassini in images from 2006 - the
Janus-Epimetheus ring and the Pallene ring). There are
rings controlled by interactions with moons, like the F
ring, which is regularly perturbed by Prometheus, and
the narrow ringlets that share the Encke Gap with Pan.

For example, Cassini data enabled scientists to confirm
earlier suspicions that Phoebe is likely an object from
the outer solar system beyond Neptune, captured by
Saturn's gravity long ago. Phoebe also turns out to be
key to the two-toned appearance of the moon Iapetus:
As Phoebe sheds its dark dust, it coats the leading side
of Iapetus and causes ice to heat up and migrate to the
moon's opposite side.

In addition to the rings' origins, Cassini's close-up
examination has revealed propeller-shaped features that
mark the locations of hidden moonlets. The processes
involved in the formation of such objects are thought to
be similar to how planets form in disks around young
stars.

Cassini also helped explain features in the main rings
called spokes, which were first spotted during the
Voyager flybys of the early 1980s. Cassini scientists
figured out that spokes are made of tiny ice particles
lifted above the surface of the rings by an electrostatic
charge, the way a statically-charged balloon held over
a person's head will lift hairs. Their charge appears to
be related to the angle of sunlight striking the rings -
a seasonal effect.

No one knew for sure what kind of environment ESA's
Huygens probe would find when it came to rest on
Titan's surface, so Huygens was built either to land on
hard ground or float, if need be. Cassini later showed
scientists that most of the moon's lakes and seas were
near the north pole, and most of the moon's landscape
was more like the Arizona desert. Cassini also observed
a surprisingly rich variety of complex, organic chemicals
forming in Titan's atmosphere.

The changing angle of the Sun also showed scientists
an array of vertical structures in the rings, including fluffy
peaks of material as high as the Rocky Mountains at the
outer edges of the A and B rings. The vertical structures
and the shadows they cast also revealed wavy patterns
in the parts of the rings that resemble a miniature Milky
Way, giving scientists insight into the way galaxies form.

Another unexpected finding - which endures as a
mystery - is the irregularity of Saturn's day (how long
the planet takes to make one rotation on its axis). At
Jupiter, a beacon-like burst of radio waves known as
"kilometric radiation" beams out with clock-like regularity
once a day. But Saturn's kilometric radiation isn't consistent. It's somewhere between 10.6 and 10.8 hours. That
might not seem like a big discrepancy, but for such a
fundamental property as the planet's rotation period, it's
frustratingly imprecise for scientists. They hope to settle
the score by the time the mission ends by flying Cassini
close enough to the planet to tease out the true answer
from the magnetic field.
- Cassini represents a staggering achievement of
human and technical complexity, finding innovative
ways to use the spacecraft and its instruments, and
paving the way for future missions to explore our solar
system.

- Some of Cassini's best discoveries were serendipitous. What Cassini found at Saturn prompted scientists to rethink their understanding of the solar system.

The Cassini-Huygens mission is an international collaboration involving three space agencies, with 19 countries
contributing hardware to the flight system. The Cassini
spacecraft carries 12 instruments, Huygens carried six
more, and scientists from 26 nations are participating in
the investigations. Among the many pioneering technologies of the mission are new solid-state data recorders with no moving parts that have since replaced tape
recorders, solid-state power switches (space-based
versions of circuit breakers), and advanced solid-state
electronics. The spacecraft has more than 9 miles
(14 kilometers) of cabling and 22,000 connections.

You can only get to know a planet so well with remote
and sporadic observations. To truly understand the
dynamics of a place as complicated and interesting as
Saturn, you have to go there and stay to explore.
Towering jets of ice and water vapor pouring out of
a moon as tiny as Enceladus were a huge surprise
(explaining why Voyager flybys in the early 1980s saw
that the moon had a young surface), as was the later
finding that the moon has an ocean under its icy crust.
Scientists also had not expected to find Saturn's magnetosphere - the region around the planet strongly
influenced by Saturn's magnetic field - to be filled
with an electrically excited gas, or plasma, of oxygen.
It turned out this was another surprise from Enceladus,
as the water vapor from its plume is broken apart by
sunlight and the liberated oxygen spreads out through
Saturn's magnetic bubble. Cassini detected this oxygen
on approach to Saturn, but its origin was perplexing at
first.

Cassini was able to explore the entire Saturn system in a
way inconceivable with conventional propulsion. Building
on the techniques used by NASA's Galileo mission to
Jupiter, Cassini mission planners designed flybys of the moon Titan to use the moon's gravity to navigate around
the Saturn system and maximize the science return of
the mission. Titan became, in a way, Cassini's virtual
"gas station" since the spacecraft couldn't possibly have
brought enough fuel for a tour this long and complex.
Each of Cassini's 127 targeted Titan flybys changed the
spacecraft's velocity (on average) by as much as the entire Saturn orbit insertion burn. The finely tuned orbit optimization techniques developed during Cassini will enable planning for future exploration that can use similar
approaches. Chief among these opportunities is NASA's
planned mission to explore Jupiter's moon Europa using
multiple flybys, known as the Europa Clipper.

When Cassini plunges into Saturn's atmosphere, it will
have spent nearly every last drop of fuel it's carrying, a
fitting end to a spacecraft that pushed itself to the limit.
- Cassini revealed the beauty of Saturn, its rings and
moons, inspiring our sense of wonder and enriching
our sense of place in the cosmos.
Earthlings have cast their gaze upward at Saturn since
ancient times, but Cassini's decade-plus odyssey in orbit
there revealed the true splendor of what is arguably the
most photogenic planet in our solar system.
The mission returned stunning views of complex, swirling features in Saturn's atmosphere, draped by the
graceful ring shadows that slowly shift with the seasons.

Cassini has required an extremely complex schedule
for determining which instrument's observations can be
made at any given moment. Cassini's intricate observation sequences, often timed to fractions of a second,
are frequently planned many months or years before
they are executed by the spacecraft. The collaboration
between multiple teams with often differing objectives
has become an exemplary model for future missions.

The spacecraft also revealed the bewildering variety
of Saturn's moons and helped us see each one as a
unique world in its own right. One has a noticeable
ridge around its equator and a two-toned color pattern
(Iapetus); one looks like the "Death Star" from Star Wars
(Mimas); one looks like a sponge (Hyperion); another
looks like a flying saucer (Atlas); another looks like a
potato (Prometheus); another looks like a ravioli (Pan).

Over the course of almost 20 years in space, Cassini
also showed that you can teach an old dog new tricks,
as the mission team found new ways to use its instruments and engineering systems that their designers had
not foreseen. These include using the radar instrument
to plumb the depths of Titan's seas; tasting the plume
of Enceladus with instruments meant to sample Titan's
atmosphere; scanning the rings with a radar originally
designed to bounce signals off Titan's surface; and having the Deep Space Network's highly accurate frequency reference fill in for the radio science instrument's lost
ultra-stable onboard frequency reference unit (Cassini's
Ultra Stable Oscillator, used for one type of radio science experiment, was turned off in 2013). In a unique
collaboration, the attitude control and navigation teams
joined with the instrument teams to develop a consolidated model of Titan's atmosphere. Cassini will finish its
mission repurposing the instruments that sniffed Titan's
atmosphere and Enceladus' plume once more, this time
to sample the Saturn atmosphere itself.

Cassini has shown us icy ringscapes that are at once
magnificent in their sheer physical extent and exquisitely
delicate in their expression of the subtle harmonies of
gravity. These ringscapes mesmerize with the myriad
designs embossed in them - the changing pattern of
thick and thin, ruffles that stand as high as the Rocky
Mountains, icy waves generated by small moons interacting with the rings, and "streamers" and "mini-jets"
created in the ribbon-thin F ring by interactions with
Prometheus.
Perhaps the most awe-inspiring views have been the
panoramic scenes that encompass the entire Saturn
system, including those with the planet and rings backlit,
and the tiny glow of our far-off, blue home planet visible
far across the gulf of outer space.
Lists of Cassini's top discoveries by year:
https://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/top-tens/sciencehighlights

The mission also has had some rather surprising earthly
benefits. A Cassini resource exchange, created prior
to launch to help team members trade and effectively
share power, mass, data rates and budget, has become
a model for how to manage other types of international
collaboration, including carbon trading.

Since April 2017, NASA's Cassini spacecraft has
been writing the final, thrilling chapter of its remarkable
20-year-long story of exploration: its Grand Finale.

Every week, Cassini has been diving through the approximately 1,200-mile-wide (2,000-kilometer-wide) gap
between Saturn and its rings. No other spacecraft has
ever explored this unique region.

A final close flyby of the moon Titan on April 22 used
the moon's gravity to reshape Cassini's trajectory so that
the spacecraft leapt over the planet's icy rings to pass
between the rings and Saturn. During 22 such passes
over about five months, the spacecraft's altitude above
Saturn's clouds varied from about 1,000 to 2,500 miles
(1,600 to 4,000 kilometers), thanks to occasional distant
passes by Titan that shifted the closest approach distance. At times, Cassini skirts the very inner edge of the
rings; at other times, it skimmed the outer edges of the
atmosphere. During its final five orbits, its orbit passes
through Saturn's uppermost atmosphere, before finally
plunging directly into the planet on Sept. 15.

Cassini is doing science, right to the end
Even as the spacecraft makes its final plunge into the
planet's atmosphere, it will be sending home new data
in real time. Key measurements will come from its mass
spectrometer, which will sniff the atmosphere, telling us
its composition until contact is lost. (Cassini's final images are expected to be returned several hours before
its final plunge.)

Cassini is diving repeatedly through an unexplored region between Saturn and its rings. At times, the spacecraft skirts the very inner edge of the rings; at other
times, it skims the outer edges of the atmosphere. While
the mission team is confident the risks are well understood, there could still be surprises. This kind of daring
tour could only be undertaken at the end of the mission.

The Grand Finale preserves and protects potentially
habitable moons of Saturn.  The Grand Finale is so much more than the final
minutes

Cassini has been operating for 20 years and is running
out of fuel. The planned descent into Saturn prevents
the spacecraft from colliding with the moons Enceladus
and Titan, which might be targets for future exploration.
This avoids any possible contamination from hardy Earth
microbes that might have stowed away and survived
the journey on Cassini intact. NASA has therefore
chosen to safely dispose of the spacecraft in the atmosphere of Saturn.

Although Cassini will plunge into Saturn at the very end,
that dramatic event is the capstone of months of daring
exploration and scientific discovery. Those 22 orbits are
the thrilling final chapter in a historic 20-year journey.

The end of Cassini's mission is sad, yes, but also a
time for celebration.  While NASA and the Cassini team are saddened that
the mission is coming to an end, it is truly a spectacular
end for one of the most scientifically rich voyages yet
undertaken in our solar system. From Cassini's launch
in 1997 to the unique Grand Finale science of 2017,
the mission has racked up a remarkable list of achievements.

This is an opportunity for unique science
As the spacecraft repeatedly dives through the gap
between the rings and Saturn during the Grand Finale, it
collects rich and valuable information that was too risky
to obtain earlier in the mission: detailed maps of Saturn's gravity and magnetic
fields, revealing how the planet is arranged internally,
and possibly helping to solve the irksome mystery of
just how fast Saturn is rotating.

Vastly improving our knowledge of how much material is in the rings, bringing us closer to understanding their origins.
Sampling of icy ring particles being funneled into the
atmosphere by Saturn's magnetic field, along with
the first direct sampling of particles from the main
rings (specifically, the D ring)
Ultra-close images of Saturn's rings and clouds.

A final, distant flyby of the giant moon Titan on Sept.
11, 2017, provides the gravitational assist that puts
Cassini on an impact course with Saturn. The spacecraft will pass 73,974 miles (119,049 kilometers) above
Titan's surface during the encounter. The geometry of
the flyby causes Cassini to slow down slightly in its orbit
around Saturn. This lowers the altitude of its flight over
the planet so that the spacecraft goes too deep into
Saturn's atmosphere to survive.

The final plunge begins about 3.5 hours prior to atmospheric entry. At this time, the spacecraft reconfigures
itself to allow science and engineering data to be sent
back to Earth with a delay of only a few seconds, rather
than storing the data on the spacecraft's data recorder
for transmission later. This novel approach allows the
Cassini team to turn the Saturn orbiter into, essentially,
an atmospheric probe for the last few hours of the mission. Eight of Cassini's 12 instruments - all the magnetosphere and plasma science instruments (CDA, INMS,
MAG, MIMI, and RPWS), plus the spacecraft's radio
science (RSS), and infrared and ultraviolet spectrometers (CIRS and UVIS) - will collect data during the final
plunge.

On Sept. 13 and 14, Cassini will acquire its final imaging
observations. This set of planned observations is a "final
look" around the Saturn system, encompassing many
subjects of interest, including a color mosaic image of
Saturn and the rings, a movie sequence of Enceladus
setting behind the planet, views of Titan, the tiny moonlets in the rings called propellers, and a final look at the
mysterious possible moonlet nicknamed "Peggy." No
images will be taken during the final plunge into Saturn,
as the data transmission rate required to send images
is too high and would prevent other high-value science
data from being returned.

Chief among the observations being made as Cassini
dives into Saturn are those of the Ion and Neutral Mass
Spectrometer, or INMS. The instrument will directly sample the composition and structure of the atmosphere,
which cannot be done from orbit. The spacecraft will
be oriented so that INMS is pointed in the direction of
motion, to allow it the best possible access to oncoming atmospheric gases. (INMS is located on the side
of the spacecraft where Huygens was attached) INMS
is sampling the uppermost atmosphere during the five
preceding orbits as well, but the spacecraft is expected
to reach an atmospheric density about twice as high
during the final plunge, prior to loss of contact.

This graphic shows Cassini's final descent toward Saturn beginning with a distant encounter with Titan. Titan's position with
respect to Cassini during the flyby is indicated here. Note that
times are predicted as of late August and subject to change.
See https://go.nasa.gov/2wbaCBT for updated times. Credit:
NASA/JPL-Caltech. Click to view this image online.

Eight of Cassini's science instruments are planned to be turned on during the final plunge, including the Ion and neutral Mass
Spectrometer (INMS). Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech

denser than any of the preceding five orbits (during
which the spacecraft transits through Saturn's upper
atmosphere at closest approach). Cassini's thrusters will
begin firing to counter atmospheric torques in order to
keep the high-gain antenna (HGA) accurately pointed at
Earth with stability as it relays science data and spacecraft health data (telemetry) in near-real time.

Other first-ever observations include measurements of
the temperatures, magnetic field, and plasma density in
Saturn's ionosphere and thermosphere.

Within one to two minutes after the thrusters begin to
fire, increasing torque caused by atmospheric drag
will push past their capacity to keep Cassini in a stable
orientation. Once the HGA, which has a very narrow
beam, turns away from Earth, our connection with the
spacecraft will be permanently severed. This is predicted
to take place at approximately 930 miles (1,500 kilometers) above Saturn's cloud tops (which lie around the 1
bar pressure level). When the signal is lost, the spacecraft's mission will be considered complete from the
perspective of mission controllers on Earth.
In the following seconds, Cassini will begin to run
through its fault protection procedures as it attempts to
stabilize itself, but it will soon begin to tumble -- slowly
at first, and then quite rapidly, around multiple axes.
Atmospheric friction, combined with the tumbling,
will place extremely high loads on Cassini's structural
components, causing some of them to break apart.
The spacecraft is expected to burn up and break up like
a meteor by the time it reaches the 1 bar atmosphere
pressure level, around the height of the cloud tops.
The remaining debris will sink into Saturn's deep atmosphere, where intense heat and pressure will cause all of
its materials to melt and completely dissociate, eventually becoming completely diluted in the planet's interior.

These graphics show Cassini's final plunge toward Saturn, with
tick marks representing time intervals of 2 minutes, leading to
the spacecraft's entry into the atmosphere. Credit: NASA/JPLCaltech. Click to view the top-down image online. Click to view
the side-view image online.



It is unlikely but possible that Cassini could
someday collide with one of these moons if it were left
in orbit around Saturn. Based upon exposure experiments on the International Space Station, it is known
that some microbes and microbial spores from Earth
are able to survive many years in the space environment
- even with no air or water, and minimal protection
from radiation.

Cassini's finale plunge is a fitting and truly spectacular
end for one of the most scientifically rich voyages yet
undertaken in our solar system. This end was planned
for Cassini in 2010, at the beginning of its second extended mission phase, known as the Solstice Mission.
The seven-year Solstice Mission was designed to use
Cassini's propellant in a way that would optimize the science return of the mission and satisfy planetary protection requirements. After a seven-year journey to Saturn
and 13 years in orbit around the planet, the propellant
used for adjusting Cassini's course is almost depleted.
If left unchecked, this situation would eventually prevent
mission operators from controlling the course of the
spacecraft.

Therefore, NASA has chosen to dispose of the spacecraft in Saturn's atmosphere to avoid the possibility that
viable microbes from Cassini could potentially contaminate Saturn's moons - principally Enceladus, and to a
lesser extent, Titan. This will ensure that Cassini cannot
spoil future studies of habitability and potential life on
those moons.

Over the past decade, Cassini data have revealed the
potential of two moons of Saturn, Enceladus and Titan.

In the decades following Cassini, scientists hope to return to the Saturn system to follow up on the mission's
many discoveries. Mission concepts under consideration include spacecraft to drift on the methane seas
of Titan and fly through the Enceladus plume to collect
and analyze samples for signs of biology.

As the Cassini spacecraft nears the end of a long journey rich with scientific and technical accomplishments,
its legacy is an already powerful influence on future
exploration. In revealing that Enceladus has essentially
all the ingredients needed for life, the mission energized
a pivot to the exploration of "ocean worlds" that has
been sweeping planetary science over the past couple
of decades.

Atmospheric probes to all four of the outer planets have
long been a priority for the science community, and the
most recent Planetary Science Decadal Survey continues to support interest in sending such a mission to
Saturn. By directly sampling Saturn's upper atmosphere
during its last orbits and final plunge, Cassini is laying
the groundwork for an eventual Saturn atmosphere
probe.

Jupiter's moon Europa has been a prime target for future exploration since NASA's Galileo mission, in the late
1990s, found strong evidence for a salty global ocean of
liquid water beneath its icy crust. But the revelation that
a much smaller moon like Enceladus could also have
not only liquid water, but chemical energy that could
potentially power biology, was staggering.

Farther out in the solar system, scientists have long had
their eyes set on exploring Uranus and Neptune. So far,
each of these worlds has been visited by only one brief
spacecraft flyby (Voyager 2, in 1986 and 1989, respectively). Collectively, Uranus and Neptune are referred to
as ice giant planets. In spite of that name, relatively little
solid ice is thought to be in them today, but it is believed
there is a massive liquid ocean beneath their clouds,
which accounts for about two-thirds of their total mass.
This makes them fundamentally different from the gas
giant planets, Jupiter and Saturn (which are approximately 85 percent gas by mass), and terrestrial planets
like Earth or Mars, which are basically 100 percent rock.
It's not clear how or where ice giant planets form, why
their magnetic fields are strangely oriented, and what
drives geologic activity on some of their moons. These
mysteries make them scientifically important, and this
importance is enhanced by the discovery that many
planets around other stars appear to be similar to our
own ice giants.

Many lessons learned during Cassini's mission are being applied in planning NASA's Europa Clipper mission,
planned for launch in the 2020s. Europa Clipper will
make dozens of flybys of Jupiter's ocean moon to investigate its possible habitability, using an orbital tour design
derived from the way Cassini has explored Saturn. The
mission will orbit the giant planet (Jupiter in this case) using gravitational assists from large moons to maneuver
the spacecraft into repeated close encounters, much
as Cassini has used the gravity of Titan to continually
shape the spacecraft's course.
In addition, many engineers and scientists from Cassini
are serving on Europa Clipper and helping to shape its
science investigations. For example, several members
of the Cassini Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer team
are developing an extremely sensitive, next-generation
version of their instrument for flight on Europa Clipper.
What Cassini has learned about flying through the
plume of material spraying from Enceladus will be invaluable to Europa Clipper, should plume activity be confirmed on Europa.

A variety of potential mission concepts are discussed
in a recently completed study, delivered to NASA in
preparation for the next Decadal Survey - including
orbiters, flybys and probes that would dive into Uranus'
atmosphere to study its composition. Future missions
to the ice giants might explore those worlds using an
approach similar to Cassini's mission.

By pulling back the veil on Titan, Cassini has ushered in
a new era of extraterrestrial oceanography - plumbing
the depths of alien seas - and delivered a fascinating
example of earthlike processes occurring with chemistry
and temperatures very different from our home planet.


